\

\

\

**PEER REVIEWED VERSION****–****FOR PUBLIC USE**

DIGITAL SECURITYCHECKLISTS FOR U.S. NON-PROFITS

Version 1.0

\
\

**What is this document set?**

This set of documents was made to help small non-profits and NGOs
improve their digital security outcomes despite limited resources and
technical skill availability. The content was commissioned as part of
the Weathering The Storms initiative of RoadMap Consulting and fiscally
sponsored by Common Counsel Foundation of Oakland, California. The
content was researched and prepared by Jonah Silas Sheridan and Lisa
Jervis, Principals of Information Ecology, a capacity building
consultancy specializing in non-profit and movement technology
management and peer reviewed by generous members of our community. Many
other eyes and hands have helped tune the recommendations to ensure
technical accuracy and ease of use. We are grateful to all the members
of our community that have helped bring these documents to life.

**About digital security**

The typical technical definition of digital security says that it is the
set of processes and practices used to **manage the risk**of an
**adversary**exploiting **vulnerabilities** in your systems such that
they may become a **threat**to the **confidentiality**, **integrity**,
or **availability**of **digital assets** (e.g., file stores, cloud
services, emails) or communication **channels** (e.g., instant
messaging, telephone, video chats). What does that really mean? It means
digital security is the work of protecting your organization's
information from being accessed, changed, or blocked by anyone—internal
or external, intentionally or not—who shouldn't be able to do so.
Effective security strategies, digital or operational are based on the
specific threats, vulnerabilities, and adversaries of your organization.
This does not mean that a detailed analysis is necessary to get started
improving your digital security practices. Many small U.S. organizations
share a set of basic threats and vulnerabilities, which these documents
are meant to help them address.

All security practices require a **strong organizational commitment**,
as they dictate changes to how you and your team work together, in
addition to demanding ongoing attention to ensure that software and
practices are regularly updated and working properly. The more you can
understand about the threats your organization faces, the better you can
select and commit to practices that will be useful for protecting your
organization and its operating environment.

We have identified solutions and practices across a range of levels of
technical skill and organizational commitment. The effectiveness of
these practices to protect from real threats is directly correlated with
the level of investment you make in implementing them. With current
tools, security measures are nearly always at odds with convenience. The
more you can understand what actual threats there are to your systems
the more directed (and therefore less impactful to operations) your
security practices will be. In this was you assure that the more you put
in to securing your systems, the more you will lower your risk of bad
outcomes.

**Why digital security checklists?**

While computers have revolutionized how non-profits work, the last
several years have begun to reveal to the general public the many risks
associated with digital communication and information storage. While all
organizations want to protect their information—and that of their
partners and allies—few have a strong understanding of the relevant
risks and most effective responses. These checklists represent
recommendations for a set of baseline digital security practices. They
have been created as a harm reduction step in response to incident
reports, current research and community feedback about the threats faced
by non-profits' computer systems.

The public-health concept of harm reduction is a useful approach to any
situation for which a perfect solution is not available. Despite being
an incomplete solution, regular hand washing is an important part of
limiting the risk of getting certain illnesses. Similarly a set of
standard best practices represented by checklists cannot mitigate all
risks, yet they can help protect you and your organization from some of
the serious threats that come with using computers to manage your
information. These checklists are meant as a starting point in
understanding and responding to the most basic threats computer users
face today. They are a necessary first step to secure our movements.
They are not sufficient for those of us working in extremely hostile
environments, for instance against highly repressive regimes and in
risky areas like conflict journalism; in no case should they be a
substitute for a more aggressive security response where warranted.

\
\

**What these checklists are not (and cannot be)**

Effective security is an ongoing process. It requires consistent
practices to be undertaken by all staff, periodic review and adjustment
to practices, and strong leadership from board and senior staff. Every
organization faces a specific set of threats to its information, some of
which may be completely outside the digital realm (e.g., infiltration of
organizing meetings by a political adversary). As no set of checklists
can address all situations, these checklists do not represent a complete
solution for securing your organization.

\
\

It is also important to recognize that security and convenience are
generally at odds. Most security practices, both in the digital realm
and the “real world,” consist of trade-offs between security and
efficiency. Following the checklist recommendations will generally not
make your work smoother and easier. Instead, many will likely create
some disruption and training needs. In order to make meaningful strides
in security, your organization must be prepared to make these trade-offs
whether steep or shallow. These investments in time and attention will
repay the organization in decreased risk to critical data and systems.

\
\

Who these checklists are for

Due to the variety of threats, vulnerabilities, and adversaries that
arise in different contexts of geopolitics and scale, the
recommendations in these checklists apply only to organizations meeting
the following criteria:

-   The organization has one or more primary locations in the United
    States each with an office network that allows staff computers to
    connect to each other, internal services and the Internet. Each
    internal network is trusted to be free from outside interference and
    is segmented from the open Internet or hosting organizations'
    networks by a firewall device.

-   The organization can successfully protect physical access to its
    office spaces and office network equipment.

-   These office networks do not host any websites or other information
    resources that are meant to accessible to all users on the public
    Internet (as opposed to resources such as printers and file servers
    that are available only to users who are connected to the office
    network).

-   The organization uses primarily Windows or Mac computers with some
    limited use of mobile devices to access its information systems.

-   Although the organization may communicate with partners abroad, its
    staff do not cross international borders while carrying the
    organization's equipment or data nor regularly work in a foreign
    country.

-   The organization is broadly seeking to protect itself from security
    threats from non-persistent general adversaries with limited
    resources (e.g., disgruntled individuals, identity thieves,
    political opponents, internal threats) rather than the U.S.
    government, other governments or other large global entities
    including multinational corporations.

If these assumptions don't apply to you, these recommendations are
inadequate; a more rigorous information security approach, in
partnership with a provider of professional security services, is
strongly recommended. Contact RoadMap for help or referrals .

How to use these checklists

\
\

The items on these checklists are meant to be actionable and accessible;
each checklist item includes a brief explanation of what it means as
well as, where possible, next steps for implementation. The icons
accompanying each item will help you identify how difficult, disruptive
and costly a given step might be to undertake.

The first checklist deals with Digital Security Readiness. If you cannot
check off the items on that list, your organization should concentrate
first on building the capacity to address these foundational elements
before undertaking additional digital security improvements.

\
\

Digital Security Readiness Checklist

\
\

**This checklist contains baseline, ongoing information systems and
technology practices that your organization must already have in place
in order to successfully take on a digital security initiative. If you
cannot check off more than 75% of the items in the list below, it is
recommended you focus on meeting these baselines before proceeding with
other digital security work. Even if at 75% or above, be sure to note
the unmarked items and make plans to implement them as soon as possible,
as not doing so will likely undermine your security efforts.**

Digital Security Readiness Tasks

✔

**Have regular and adequate technical support provided either by staff
assigned via job description or contracted with outside agencies.**

*If your existing hardware and software are not well supported,
introducing new tools and practices will likely meet with significant
barriers, as new technologies and tools often demand significant ongoing
technical support for proper setup and functioning. There are as many
ways to secure technical support as there are organizations. Talking to
peer organizations in your area is a good way to find quality help.*

\

**Have a culture of training and learning, including strong technology
training and follow up as part of new staff orientation procedures.**

*New tools and practices demand end user training. If your organization
doesn't have established practices around training, implementing
improved and possibly complex secure practices is nearly impossible.
Beginning with documentation and training for new hires is a wise first
step in this area. Following up with new employees at 30 day intervals
will ensure they continue to get the support they need to do their work
effectively and securely.*

\

**Have a common and clearly communicated set of information systems that
all staff use effectively.**

*If your staff are using personal file-sharing, email, task management,
or other accounts without knowledge or guidance from the organization,
not only will your efficiency suffer but the environment becomes
impractical to secure. How can you protect things you have no access to
at an administrative level or, worse yet, don't even know are in use?*

\

**Have a recurrent line item for technology in your budget**

*Security is an ongoing process and will require ongoing investments in
computer equipment and software to be effective. Work with your
technical support provider to determine an appropriate amount to put
into this line item.*

\

**Provide relatively new and adequately powered computers to all staff**

*Industry standard best practice is to replace laptops and desktops
every 3 to 5 years. Encryption tools use a lot of power and can bring
older, inadequately powered computers to a near halt, making some
security steps untenable for staff. Money for replacing 1/3 to 1/5 of
your computers each year should be part of your recurring technology
budgeting.*

\

**Have some baseline non-technical security practices**

*If you do not control your office space and access to your computers,
your other digital security steps can be easily circumvented by walking
into your office. Rotate alarm system codes, door codes, wireless
network passwords and other sensitive access procedures such as
emergency building access when staff leave the organization.*

\

**Make sure the computers and other devices you use, including personal
devices that staff may use to access organizational information, are not
compromised by malware, viruses or other intrusive software.**

\

*As a first step, ensure you are running antivirus software on all
computers*

*Antivirus software for Macs and Windows computers is available to
non-profits at a discounted rate through Tech Soup
(**http://techsoup.org**). If you haven't been running antivirus
software or otherwise aren't sure about the status of your devices, you
can have the operating system (OS) on it reinstalled to help guarantee
the computer is free of malware and viruses. If reinstalling, use a copy
from the OS provider, NOT the computer manufacturer, as manufacturers
often bundle dangerous software in their installs. There are other ways
in which yoru devices can be compromised which will not be remedied by
OS install. If you suspect such an issue, get a new computer and call a
security professional.*

\

**Have a disaster recovery plan that includes making regular backups of
organizational data that are stored away from your main offices. Do not
rely exclusively on third parties to back up and hold your
information.**

*This actually is a digital security practice itself, but
straightforward and critical enough that it needs to come before any
other digital security steps. Talk to your technical support provider
about the status of your backups. Refer to the guide at the following
link for ideas on how to improve your disaster preparedness
http://www.techsoup.org/disaster-planning-and-recovery*

\

Legend: What the icons mean



This icon flags columns for you to record actions you have taken. Check
them off as you go!

\
\



This icon represents the overall difficulty rating for a checklist item.
One star items should be doable by most technology capable
organizations. Items with two stars may require some outside assistance
and work flow shifts. Three stars will require significant
organizational commitment of resources and technical assistance. Items
with four stars are only for organizations ready to take on advanced
security practices, including the ongoing commitment of human and other
resources needed to make them effective.

\
\



This icon represents the amount of technical skill needed to undertake
the practice. One set of tools means most skilled computer users can do,
or be trained to do, the task. Two sets of tools require “power user”
technical skills, often found in the “Accidental Techie” on staff. Three
sets of tools will require a technical support person to do the work.
Four sets of tools means you will need a technical support person with
significant skills in networking or security to undertake the practice.

\
\



This icon represents the amount of work flow disruption taking on this
task entails, and consequently how much staff time for documentation,
training and work shifts is required. One lightning bolt items will be
mostly innocuous and staff can be trained in a brief session. Two
lightning bolts means the practice will require more training and can
disrupt existing work flows dramatically. Three lightning bolts signals
that significant work flow shifts and training will be required to
undertake the practice. Four lightning bolts means the task will disrupt
work flow completely and is only for organizations where security is of
far greater importance than efficiency or convenience.

Email Safety Checklist

\
\

This checklist provides a number of practices that can help protect you
and your staff when using email to communicate. Before writing an email,
ask yourself, would I put this on a postcard that might be kept forever?
If the answer is no, consider using other means to communicate.

Think about email you receive like a shut up envelope. If you don't know
who sent it or what is in the envelope, you should open it very
carefully. Especially since, in the case of email, it may contain
viruses or other threats to your organization.

**If performing work using sensitive or confidential information
including that required to be protected by law (such as personal health
information, employment records and credit card numbers) you are must
avoid the use of regular (non-encrypted) email to communicate that
information. Where email is your only communication option, you may need
to implement an encryption scheme as found in the final checklist item
below.**

 Record actions ****Difficulty rating ****Technical skill level
****Work flow disruption

Email Safety Tasks









**Train your organization not to send sensitive or controversial
information over email whenever possible.**

*Information in these categories include but are not limited to credit
card information, social security numbers, health information,
organizational strategy, potentially damaging critiques or insults.
Establish other practices for sharing this information such as instant
messaging, secure downloads or plain old paper mail.*

\







**Use strong passwords for all email accounts; change them on a regular
basis, and immediately if you have any suspicion of them being used by a
third party**

*Strong passwords generally are made with a mix of letters, numbers and
symbols and are as long as possible. Teach everyone in your organization
how to generate and store strong passwords as well as how to reset their
own passwords to critical accounts. Good passwords can be made a variety
of ways. One recommended method is called Diceware:
http://world.std.com/\~reinhold/diceware.html*

\







**Learn to recognize suspicious behavior in your email account.**

*Generally anything in your email unexpected should be looked at with
suspicion. Be wary of any messages that ask you to do something,
including clicking a link, opening an attachment or emailing back
information. Be aware that it can be easy to fake email “From” addresses
so notice any emails that don't match the usual style of the sender
indicated in the “From” address. If someone has broken into your account
you may see reply**messages**you don't understand, additional sent
items, new folders or filters being created or other settings changes.
Suspicious emails or account behavior should be reported to a technical
support person and you should preemptively change your password.*

\







**Always login to email over a private connection**

*This means using an address that starts with https:// for webmail, and
turning on mandatory STARTTLS , SSL or TLS encryption in the settings of
your email client. For GMail, connecting using a recent version of the
Chrome or Firefox browser will ensure you have such a secure
connection.*

*This practice will help ensure that someone operating on a network
between you and your email server cannot read or alter your email in
transit. Note that if your email is sent to someone outside of your
organization you cannot control the connections between your email
server and the recipients' servers nor how the recipients access the
message so it is still vulnerable to attack. to .Because you control
your organization and mail server, following this practice may improve
the overall security of internal email but is not justification to send
sensitive information using email internally or externally.*

\







**Where you can, implement two factor authentication for email
accounts.**

*Many email providers have begun to offer login systems that rely on
more that one piece of information to identify yourself. There can be
several, but usually there are just two; your password and another code
you have. Often this is a code sent by text message to your phone but
can also be embedded on a special type of USB device, a program that
generates codes on your phone or even a piece of paper with preprinted
codes. Users will have to get used to having this extra step to login to
new devices, but it protects from someone who obtains either item from
getting into the account.*

\







**Don't send email attachments unless using encryption***Unencrypted
mail attachments are not protected from being viewed or altered between
recipients, and they end to stay in email boxes where they are harder to
control. Perhaps more important, regular use of attachments builds and
encourages a culture of opening them automatically, which is a major
source of viruses, malware and associated intrusions. A better practice
is to have files on a server and send links to documents instead of the
documents themselves. Ideally these links lead to locations that
themselves are protected by passwords or other authentication, or are
temporary and expire soon after use.*

\







**Be very careful clicking links or opening attachments in emails.**

*Links, often innocuous looking or even hidden within emails, are a
major way adversaries get rogue software inside networks. Before
clicking a link or anywhere on an email, check that it points to a
domain name (such as roadmapconsulting.org) that you recognize and
expect (in most email programs, as on the web, hovering over a link
displays the URL it points to). If not, check with the sender to make
sure you aren't being scammed. Similarly, don't open an attachment
unless you are expecting it and the filename is in line with that
expectation.****NEVER****open links for files from unknown senders or in
otherwise suspicious emails.*

\







**Don't send mass email from standard accounts; instead, use a third
party service and if possible a dedicated mass email subdomain.**

*Sending bulk email from regular email accounts can lead to all sorts of
problems for mail delivery primarily by having your accounts or domain
name marked as a source of spam. You may also wish to send bulk email
using a separate domain name from your main email (such as
comms.roadmapconsulting.org) to further differentiate the traffic and
reduce the risk of delivery problems for your regular emails.
Additionally ensuring all email lists are opt-in (people have to confirm
they want to receive them) and including instructions on how to
discontinue them will minimize the chance of your emails being marked as
spam by recipients.*

\







**Pay for a service to filter spam and viruses from email before it
reaches your inbox**

*This service comes included if you use Gmail, but doesn't with all
email services. Filtering mail before it reaches your network lessens
the chance of a virus or malware bearing link or attachment being
clicked on. After initial setup this service will be nearly invisible to
staff, but requires that someone is tasked with dealing with false
positives and other email delivery problems. Be aware, however, that
this item involves a significant tradeoff: filtering means that another
company is viewing your email before it reaches you and so may increase
risk of that information being exposed. The Electric Embers Cooperative
(*[*http://electricembers.coop*](http://electricembers.coop/)*) offers
such a service specifically for non-profits.*

\







**Where email is accessed on mobile or laptop devices, configure email
clients and web browser to store as little information as possible**

*Most web browsers can and should be set to clear their cache when
closed. Most email clients can be configured to not store email offline
and to clear caches when closed. Both can be configured not to store
passwords as well. By configuring both this way, a lost laptop or phone
will potentially result in far less information disclosure. Note that it
may also mean that you need to enter a password every time you start the
program and cannot access emails when not connected to the Internet so
may have extreme operational impact to your team*

\







**Establish an email phishing training and education program and test
staff through live testing.**

“*Phishing” is where emails are crafted to look as legitimate as
possible in order to get you to click a link or attachment. This is
actually a social engineering attack more than a technical one, and so
addressing the human element through education is the best way forward.
Testing people by sending fake, innocuous phishing emails, is a hard
task, but recommended to give people a chance to practice without bad
consequences. There are multiple companies that offer this training if
you don't have internal capacity to provide it yourself. Contact RoadMap
for referrals.*

\







**Setup correct DKIM and SPF records for your email domains and
subdomains**

*These are highly technical steps made in conjunction with your email
and Domain Name Service providers to minimize the ability of spammers or
phishers to fake emails from your organization. “Hard fail” settings are
preferred for SPF records wherever possible. Once set up, this should
have minimal impact on day to day operations, though it make changingo
your email provider or infrastructure more complex. Find more
information at*[*http://dkim.org*](http://dkim.org/)*and
http://www.openspf.org/.*

\







**Use PGP encryption to secure your email “end to end”**

*This is a highly technical and labor-intensive initiative to undertake,
but probably the most complete way to minimize any inadvertent
disclosure of data through email. It will likely require significant
changes to staff practices. The most common tools for using PGP
encryption with email are the Mozilla Thunderbird email client and the
associated Enigmail plugin . You can find a guide for that setup
at*[*https://securityinabox.org/en/guide/thunderbird/windows*](https://securityinabox.org/en/guide/thunderbird/windows)*OSX's
Mail program and open source add on GPGTools
(*[*https://gpgtools.org*](https://gpgtools.org/)*) is also a workable
tool set for using PGP encrypted email on Macs. Outlook requires a
commercial add-on from Symantec to use PGP encryption on Windows. For
organizations with more resources, S/MIME is an alternate encryption
scheme that works well with a Microsoft Exchange/Outlook environment. If
interested in either of these solutions talk to your technical support
provider and be prepared to invest some time and resources into
planning, implementation and training.*

\







\

Password and Authentication Safety Checklist

\
\

This checklist provides a number of practices that can help you and your
staff better curate your organization's passwords and control who
accesses your information. While passwords are the most common form of
authentication (that is, proving your identity to a computer system),
other systems are emerging that offer better protection. Some are
mentioned below.

In the recommendations below, the term “organizational” is used to
identify the group of accounts that grant access to your organization's
online identity, backups, administrative controls and other critical
systems. These tend to be used infrequently, but are very powerful. As
such these passwords should be treated different from “everyday”
credentials (the set of passwords that staff members need to perform
their regular duties using databases, communication tools, and other
platforms used for daily work).

\
\

 Record actions ****Difficulty rating ****Technical skill level
****Work flow disruption

Password and Authentication Safety Tasks









**Use strong passwords for all accounts, organizational and everyday**

\

*Strong passwords are generally are longer that 8 characters, use a mix
of symbols, numbers and both upper and lowercase letters, and do not
include any dictionary words or personal information. There are many
ways to generate strong passwords. There is an online guide to creating
passwords as part of the the excellent Security In a Box website you can
find
here:*[*https://securityinabox.org/en/guide/passwords*](https://securityinabox.org/en/guide/passwords)*.*

\

*Diceware is another excellent scheme for creating good
passwords:*[*http://world.std.com/\~reinhold/diceware.html*](http://world.std.com/~reinhold/diceware.html)

\

*Most password managers will make a random password for you, as will
other available software for that specific purpose.*

\

\







**Don't use the same password for more than one site or service**

\

*If you don't reuse passwords , someone learning your username and
password for one service won't make it easy to access the other accounts
you use. Use different passwords for each service so you aren't relying
on the provider to protect your most important secret.*

\

\







**Try to limit written password storage**

\

*Instead use techniques found in the Security In a Box online guide
listed above to create memorable but strong passwords. If you initially
need a written copy of your password, protect it physically by storing
it someplace like your wallet. Try to type your password with less
looking at the copy each time, and destroy the paper copy when you**have
memorized the password.**If you are having trouble memorizing passwords,
use a password manager as indicated below.*

\

\







**Do not tell anyone else your password(s), ever**

*Even if someone claims to be from IT or technical support, do not give
them your password. Nearly every system allows for administrative reset
of passwords for maintenance. This creates an auditable trail that you
account was accessed and alerts you as well. Although changing your
password afterwards is an extra step, it will ensure that you and only
you have access to your digital information.*

\

\

\







**Consider making single use passwords for sites you rarely use**

*If you need to create an account for something that you do not expect
to use frequently and where you can reset the password easily by email,
you may just wish to generate a very long random string of numbers,
letters and symbols and not record it anywhere or remember it. Most
password managers will make a random password for you, as will other
available software for that specific purpose. This service will now have
a password stronger than if you made one and tried to remember it.*

*The next time you need to login to that service you can hit the “forgot
password link” to get a login link and repeat the process. This is a
little slower , perhaps, than a stored password but the benefit is that
you will never leak your password for that tool – because you don't know
it! Of course you wouldn't do this with an account you use all the time
but it is useful to ease the password management load. Recognize that
this reduces the security of the account using a “single use” password
to the security of your email account (since you use that to get back
into the service) so your email password needs to be strong and
memorable.*

\







**Have all staff use password manager software**

*There are many passwords associated with modern work flows. Because
they could be used to disrupt your work in various ways passwords need
to be protected. They shouldn't be stored in spreadsheets, text files or
word processor documents (even password protected ones as they are
simple to break open).*

\

*Instead password manager software is available which stores all of your
passwords in a secure file and can easily take care of all of the
checklist items above. You just remember a single password to open that
file up and then can have an array of unique, complex passwords for all
yoru services.*

\

*KeePass and KeePassX use the same encrypted file format, can run on
most any computer and so are recommended password managers. Security In
a Box also has a KeePass overview here:
https://securityinabox.org/en/guide/keepass/windows*

\

*Web browsers are insecure environments for password storage and
handling, but their central role in many organizations has made
web-based tools for password management very popular. Evaluating online
services and their current security claims is outside of the scope of
this document. We acknowledge that online password management tools
often have adequate security levels for many organizations' everyday
password handling needs; however,they are not recommended for storing
core organizational passwords or other highly sensitive information.*

\







**Separate organizational and everyday passwords**

\

*Organizational passwords include any passwords that grant
administrative control of your organization's information systems or
online identity . These are very powerful credentials and so should be
stored separately from passwords that just get staff into their personal
user accounts. You can do this by making a separate login or file in
your password manager application, or by choosing a completely different
manager altogether.*

\

*Placing organizational passwords in a KeePass file that only a few key
staff members can access will lessen the risks of adopting an online
password manager for everyday passwords, but will also place a burden on
those staff members. Balancing these needs should be factored in your
decision.*

\







*t*

\







**Set minimum password lengths and enforce complexity rules on services
where you can do so, and regularly monitor user password strength.**

*On many platforms including Windows Active Directory and Google Apps
you can set controls at an administrative level to ensure people use
strong passwords. It takes some advance planning and staff training, as
setting up these controls without being clear on the implications can
lock people out of their computers or work files . In addition, someone
will need to be designated as the point person for resolving problems
that arise from these controls. This step does however improve the
security of all users at one time so is highly recommended.*

\







\

Public Wireless Network Safety Checklist

\
\

This checklist provides a number or practices that can help protect you
and your staff when using publicly available wireless networks such as
those in hotels, cafés and airports. Because there are so many ways that
wireless networks can be compromised, this checklist is not exhaustive.

**If performing work using sensitive or confidential information
including that required to be protected by law (such as personal health
information) you are best off avoiding the use of public networks for
those tasks.**

 Record actions ****Difficulty rating ****Technical skill level
****Work flow disruption

Public Wireless Network Safety Tasks









**Keep all web browser software, including extensions, updated to the
latest version. Prefer Firefox or Chrome browsers. Only use Internet
Explorer and Safari when required.**

*Internet Explorer has had a much higher incidence of vulnerabilities
than Chrome and Firefox while Safari has suffered some recent security
concerns. Although nearly all of the latest browsers support
“certificate pinning”**which makes it harder to intercept secure
connections,**Chrome and Firefox have led the development of this
important feature. These browsers can be downloaded
from*[*https://getfirefox.com*](https://getfirefox.com/)*and
https://google.com/chrome.*

\







**Install the HTTPS Everywhere extension for all of the web browsers you
use on your system.**

*This step will help ensure that more sites you visit and information
you submit to them cannot be seen by others on the wireless network or
the operator of the network itself.********You can install the extension
from the following page: https://www.eff.org/HTTPS-EVERYWHERE*

\







**Install Privacy Badger, a browser add-on which will limit the
“cookies” - small persistent chunks of information - set on your
computer by websites**

*Privacy Badger is software produced by the non-profit Electronic
Frontier Foundation (https://eff.org) to help reduce the privacy
breaches and tracking that come with the use of cookies. These cookies
can be transferred insecurely so can, if poorly implemented, expose
login credentials or other information in transit. As an extra benefit,
you will increase you privacy and lessen your online tracking as a
result of using this software. Download it at
https://privacybadger.org.*

\







**Prefer wireless networks that use a password, ideally a unique one for
each person connecting, and preferably using WPA or WPA2 encryption
rather than WEP encryption.**

*A password on a wireless network means the information moving across it
is less easily captured and decoded by someone nearby. If everyone has a
unique password this gets even harder. WPA and WPA2 offer stronger
protection than WEP, which is now relatively easily compromised. You can
easily view what encryption is in use on most computers. In OSX, hold
down the Option key and click the wireless indicator in the top right
corner to reveal extra information about each wireless network. The
method for viewing these details is different in each version of Windows
so ask your tech support provider for assistance for the software you
use..*

\

\







**Confirm the network details before you connect.**

*An attacker can setup an access point with a name similar or identical
to a legitimate one, so that you connect to it instead of the network
you intend. Make sure to ask the proprietor of a public network what the
network name and password are, and connect to the network with that name
that accepts that password. This doesn't completely guarantee that the
network you are connecting to isn't hostile or compromised, but it makes
the difficulty of hijacking your connection much higher.*

\







**Turn off the built-in file sharing functionality on your computer or
device**

*Although handy for sharing files with peers, the built-in file sharing
functionality on your computer is vulnerable to abuse or accidental
information leakage. It is preferable to set up alternate tools and
practices for sharing files, such as a central file repository.*

*To turn off file sharing on a Mac, go to Apple menu \> System
Preferences, then click Sharing and make sure all the boxes are
unchecked.*

*See this article for turning off file sharing on a Windows computer:
https://support.microsoft.com/en-us/kb/307874*

*Recognize that if you are currently using the built-in file sharing
functionality to share files inside an office, doing this will disrupt
current work practices.*

\







**Turn on your computer's firewall and disallow all external
connections**

*A firewall prevents unauthorized connections from other computers on
the wireless network. There is a built in firewall in every computer,
but it is not turned on by default and may allow connections to certain
services. The firewall settings can be found on Macs in System
Preferences\>Security. On Windows computers, the firewall settings are
in the System and Security tool in Control Panel. More information about
Windows Firewall can be found here:
http://www.microsoft.com/security/pc-security/firewalls-using.aspx*

\







**Ensure that the wireless network is not presenting false
certificates**

*Increasingly, networks are set up to monitor traffic for various
reasons such as ad placement or content filtering. However, this
potentially compromises all secure connections, as it allows traffic to
be monitored via the same mechanism in what is called a
Man-In-The-Middle (MITM) attack.. The network device will replace the
security certificate from the service you are connecting to with one of
its own. Anyone with access to that device can see any communication
between you and that service. Learning to view certificates in your web
browser, or installing and learning to use a tool such as Certificate
Patrol (available only for Firefox; read more at
http://patrol.psyced.org/) will help you identify*

*Viewing certificate information in
Chrome:*[*https://support.google.com/chrome/answer/95617?hl=en*](https://support.google.com/chrome/answer/95617?hl=en)

\

*Viewing certificate information in Firefox:*

[*https://support.mozilla.org/en-US/kb/how-do-i-tell-if-my-connection-is-secure*](https://support.mozilla.org/en-US/kb/how-do-i-tell-if-my-connection-is-secure)

*https://support.mozilla.org/en-US/kb/secure-website-certificate*

\







**Use a Virtual Private Network (VPN) to securely tunnel out of public
networks**

*A VPN creates a secure connection for your computers to use to access
the office network and the Internet. This connection, or tunnel, can be
used to hide all information moving from your computers to the Internet
or office network from the operator or other users of the wireless
network. Use of a VPN severely limits the amount of trust you have to
place in the owner and operator of the network you are on and so limits
your exposure to them. These factors make VPNs a very effective way to
protect your self on untrusted networks.*

\

*A VPN is implemented via a device you own located in your office or at
an offsite facility, or that a third party provides you use of for a
fee. Choosing a VPN provider and setting up computers to use it are not
simple tasks, and critically important**–**a misstep in setup or use can
expose your information or bring your work to a crawl. In addition VPNs
add a layer of network traffic and will slow down your Internet access
so your distance to and bandwidth available from your VPN provider (or
office if hosting your own) will make a difference to performance.*

\

*Consider if the speed tradeoff is acceptable to you before choosing to
implement a VPN. If you do, the investment in implementation, setup and
hassle is repaid by a solution that*

\







\
\

Glossary

\
\

**Backup**. Regularly updated copies of your digital assets, ideally
stored in several different places, so that if access to or integrity of
your data is disrupted for any reason (damage to computers due to
accident or natural disaster, accidental or malicious deletion of files,
etc.), the assets can be restored. Online backup services such as Mozy
and CrashPlan are best supplemented by backups stored on organizational
equipment and in secure offsite storage.

**Cookies**. Small files placed on your computer by websites that you
visit; they are used to manage website features such as logins and can
also be used to track behavior on the web. While not all cookies are a
security risk, if poorly implemented they can expose the information
they contain. More information about cookies is available at
http://www.allaboutcookies.org/.

**Digital assets**. Any and all data electronically stored or used by
your organization. This includes your organization's files, website,
emails, social media accounts, online banking accounts, etc. Some of
these items may be ones that you administer yourself (e.g., the contents
of staff hard drives, file repositories stored on servers owned and
controlled by your organization); others may be maintained by
third-party services on your behalf (e.g., files on Google Drive or
Box). Others are services that you participate in that are owned and
controlled by others (subject to terms of service), such as
organizational Facebook pages.

**DKIM records**. DomainKeys Identified Mail (DKIM) is a system to
protect email from abuse, both from forged sender addresses and from
content alteration. The system operates at the server level so requires
help from your email provider to setup.

**Domain Name System.**The domain name system (DNS) is like a phone book
for the Internet. It translates domain names (such as
roadmapconsulting.org or whitehouse.gov) into the numbers (ip addresses)
used to find services on the Internet. It can also be used to store
other information about your organizatio's informatio systems, such as
SPF records or DKIM keys.

**Encryption**. A mechanism by which your data scrambled in order to
protect it from being read by unauthorized parties. Authorized parties
have are able to decrypt (i.e., unscramble) it. There are many different
ways to encrypt communications and other digital assets.

**Encryption Key.**An encryption key is a piece of information that you
share with an authorized party so they can encrypt and/or decrypt
information to or from you. In most cases this information is highly
sensitive and needs to be protected however modern encryption schemes
allow you to have a “public” key that you can safely share with anyone.

**Extensions**. Small pieces of software that you install as part of
your web browser in order to give your browser additional capabilities.

**Firewall.**A piece of software or hardware device that analyzes and
selectively blocks or alters information passing between two networks.
Common places to find firewalls are between your office network and the
Internet and on your computer to protect you from other computers on
your office network.

**Office network**. The equipment in your office that allows staff
computers to connect to each other, on site resources such as file
servers and to the Internet. If you cannot trust that nobody else is
controlling this network your security progress will be compromised.

**Password manager software**. Software that keeps your passwords in an
encrypted format, protected by a master password. This allows you to
store multiple passwords by remembering only one. Password managers are
available as software that you install (e.g., KeePass) and as a
web-based service (e.g., LastPass). While web-based password managers
can be secure enough to hold the passwords staff use to access their
accounts for everyday purposes, they are not recommended to store the
passwords that grant administrative access to core organizational
accounts.

**Security certificates**. Security certificates are a specific kind of
file that includes an encryption key, and often times additional
information about that key. Websites such as used for banking and other
services frequently use them to allow you to establish a secure
connection with their servers.

**SPF records**. Sender Policy Framework (SPF) is a system that allows
you to tell others what servers and services are allowed to send email
for your organization's domain name. Setting up this record requires the
assistance of your DNS provider and can have unintended negative
consequences for your email delivery if not properly done.

**Virtual Private Network (VPN)**. A connection between computers that
them to exchange information in an encrypted form. This can allow you to
both “tunnel out of” a network you don't trust or to get you access to
information on your office network from someplace else on the Internet.

**Wireless Access Point.**A wireless access point (WAP) is a piece of
hardware configured to host a wireless network. In many small networks
the WAP will also be a firewall separating the network from the rest of
the Internet.

**WEP, WPA and WPA2**. All are methods of encrypting wireless network
traffic between a device like a computer or phone and a wireless access
point. WEP is an older encryption method and it is far less secure than
WPA and WPA2, which are newer methods.

\
\

\
\

i

\

nformation ecology, llc \* oakland, california

https://iecology.org \* 510-479-9779 \* info@iecology.org

\
\

**Please Note**: Although these practices are highly recommended they do
not in and of themselves constitute a successful security practice.
Information security is an ongoing process of managing risk and no list
of procedures is an adequate replacement for a thorough review of what
information you are protecting, why and from whom paired with an
organizational commitment to shifting operations to mitigate risk.
Information Ecology, RoadMap Consulting and Common Counsel are not
liable for negative outcomes associated with following these practices.

Last update 4/20/2015
